APIIT Education Group has emerged over the years as one of Malaysia’s Largest Education Groups.

The Asia Pacific University of Technology & Innovation (APU) is amongst Malaysia’s Premier Private Universities, and is where a unique fusion of technology, innovation and creativity works effectively towards preparing graduates for significant roles in business and society globally. APU has earned an enviable reputation as an award-winning University through its achievements in winning a host of prestigious awards at national and international levels, as well as an excellent track record in producing highly employable graduates who are able to immediately contribute to industry upon graduation.

APU is the First Malaysian University to achieve an overall rating of Five Stars Plus in the latest QS Stars Rating awards that were presented at the QS Apple Conference on 1st Nov 2021. Five Stars Plus institution must achieve five stars across all categories in addition to achieving minimum highest benchmark score by QS STARS.  APU is amongst 19 universities worldwide to achieve this honour.

APU is ranked among the Top 10 Private Universities in the latest QS Asia University Rankings 2022. APU is Ranked amongst Top 3 for International Students, Top 5 for Inbound Exchange and is amongst the Top 30 Universities for International Faculty by QS. APU ranks among the Top 280 Universities in the QS World University Rankings – Asia 2022. 

Originally established as the Asia Pacific Institute of Information Technology (APIIT) in 1993 and the Asia Pacific University College of Technology & Innovation (UCTI) in 2004, APU’s sound approach to nurturing school leavers into qualified professionals has resulted in our graduates being highly sought after by employers. With an international student community from more than 130 countries studying in its Malaysian campus, APU offers a truly cosmopolitan learning environment which prepares students well for the global challenges which lie ahead.

While Technology forms a common core as an enabler across its academic programmes, APU offers a broad range of programmes encompassing areas such as Computing, Technology and Engineering, as well as programs in Business, Accounting and Banking & Finance.

The Asia Pacific Language Centre (APLC) is the specialized Language Centre of The Asia Pacific University of Technology & Innovation (APU) and the APIIT Education Group, located in Kuala Lumpur, Malaysia. Asia Pacific Language Centre (APLC) is the amongst a few 5-Star Language Centre as awarded by Ministry of Education in KL and part of APIIT Education Group. APLC offers a wide range of quality English language courses which are specifically designed to improve English in a warm, friendly and professional learning environment. APLC is also a British Council authorised Testing Centre for IELTS. We offer English language intensive study & holiday packages as well as programmes which are customized to address specific needs of our clients. The Language Centre also regularly organizes exciting social programmes to enhance the overall student learning experience and provide students with a fantastic Malaysian experience in Kuala Lumpur. More than 1200 Students attend APLC to enhance their English each year.

As Institutions within the APIIT Education Group, APLC & APU offer a truly cosmopolitan learning environment which prepares students well for the global challenges which lie ahead. APU offers a wide range of degrees with Technology as a common core. It is APU’s aim to nurture and encourage innovation through our programmes, with the intention of producing individuals who will learn, adapt and think differently in new and better ways. In this regard the Asia Pacific Language Centre plays an important role in preparing students with the right level of language and professional skills which they require in order to achieve success as they eventually progress into their academic studies at APU.

