APIIT Brand of ‘Asia Pacific’ has emerged as one of the strongest brands for Higher Education. Established in 1993, APIIT has grown from strength to strength over the years and has emerged as one of Malaysia’s Largest Education Groups addressing all levels of Education.

Its brand identity is aptly represented in the use of the globe depicting APIIT’s global outlook and philosophy in the development of internationally-oriented curricula, as well as the infusion of international best practices in the delivery and quality assurance of its programmes.  The swirls around the globe intersect with Malaysia at the core, reflecting how this global outlook has enabled APIIT to attract students and staff from all over the world to Malaysia, contributing to the development of an international community of professional scholars, as a model of education in the Asia Pacific region.

In March 2011, The APIIT Education Group received the prestigious Prime Minister’s Industry Excellence Award from the Prime Minister of Malaysia. Only one organization was selected to receive the Prime Minister’s Industry Excellence Award from among nearly 30 other award recipients in 8 different categories. APIIT Education Group was also awarded Export Excellence Award (Services).

Over the years, APIIT Education Group has secured more than 400 awards at local, regional and international level. These awards serve as acknowledgements of the achievement of APIIT and our students, reaffirming our standing as being among the leading technology Institutions in Malaysia.

Our vision is to be a leading university of technology and innovation transforming students into highly employable, competent and future-proof professionals.

Our mission is to provide high quality, affordable, innovative and internationally benchmarked education and research in a professional, ethical and student centred manner by designing and delivering a range of enriching and distinctive learning experiences.

The Asia Pacific University of Technology & Innovation (APU) is amongst Malaysia’s Premier Private Universities, and is where a unique fusion of technology, innovation and creativity works effectively towards transforming students into highly competent, employable and future-proof professionals. APU has earned an enviable reputation as an award-winning University through its achievements in winning a host of over 400 prestigious awards at local and international levels.

APU was announced as among the Highest Rated Emerging Universities in Malaysia, being rated 5-STAR (EXCELLENT Rating) under the latest SETARA Ratings by the Ministry of Higher Education (MOHE). APU has maintained this Excellent Rating consecutively in the SETARA 2011, 2013, 2017 as well as in the latest ratings announced on 18th Dec 2020. The SETARA ratings system measures the performance of teaching and learning in universities in Malaysia.

APU emerges as the First QS 5 Stars Plus University in Malaysia 

APU is the First Malaysian University to achieve an overall rating of Five Stars Plus in the latest QS Stars Rating awards that were presented at the QS Apple Conference on 1st Nov 2021. Five Stars Plus institutions must achieve five star ratings across all categories in addition to achieving minimum highest benchmark score by QS STARS.  APU is amongst 20 universities worldwide to achieve this honour.

According to Leigh Kamolins, Head of Evaluation, QS Intelligence Unit, "The QS Stars university rating system audits and rates over 600 universities globally in a broader range of criteria than any world ranking exercise. Comprehensive audits are also independently carried out as part of the ratings exercise. QS Stars™ shines a light on both the excellence and the diversity of the rated institution. Congratulations to Asia Pacific University (APU) for being the first ever QS 5-Stars Plus rated institution in Malaysia and being 1 amongst 20 in the world." 

The full list of QS 5-Stars Plus rated institutions can be found here https://www.topuniversities.com/qs-stars

APU Triumphs in QS World University Ranking 2024

Asia Pacific University of Technology & Innovation (APU) is the ONLY Malaysian University to achieve both QS 5 Star+ Rating & being Ranked in QS World University Ranking 2024 - Ranked Top 2.2% in the World. APU is Ranked #621-630 in the World, Ranked No.1 for International Students in Malaysia and Ranked No.16 for International Students in the World in QS World University Ranking 2024. APU achieved Malaysia’s highest Rank for any individual indicator for International Students, placing 16th in the World. APU is also Ranked No. 179 in Asia in the latest QS World University Ranking released on 27th June 2023.

Source : QS World University Rankings 2024: Top Global Universities | Top Universities

APU Shines in QS Asia University Ranking 2023

APU is ranked among the Top 10 Malaysian Private Universities in the latest QS Asia University Rankings 2023 announced on 8th November 2022. APU is Ranked amongst Top 5 for International Students, Top 5 for Inbound Exchange and is amongst the Top 30 Universities for International Faculty by QS. APU Ranks No. 52 in the South-Eastern Asia ranking and among Top 240 Universities in the QS World University Rankings – Asia 2023.

APU was awarded the Premier Digital Tech University status by the Malaysia Digital Economy Corporation (MDEC). APU is recognised for its commitment in offering top-notch digital technology courses and ensuring our highly-skilled graduates continue to flourish and fill future digital job demands locally and globally. Premier Digital Tech University status was awarded by the Minister of Higher Education Malaysia. Premier Digital Tech Universities and Preferred Digital Tech Polytechnics (PDTIs) are Malaysia’s leading digital tech-focused tertiary institutions. The PDTIs have a proven track record in producing high quality graduates for digital tech-based high value jobs, via cutting-edge research and education policies, strong industry linkages, and career development and placement services.

Originally established as the Asia Pacific Institute of Information Technology (APIIT) in 1993 and Asia Pacific University College of Technology & Innovation (UCTI) in 2004, APU’s sound approach to nurturing school leavers into qualified professionals has resulted in our graduates being highly sought after by employers.

Born out of a collaboration between MDEC, the Ministry of Higher Education Malaysia and industry leaders, the PDTIs deliver end-to-end solutions to ensure that future graduates are propelled into becoming dynamic members of an innovation-driven and knowledge-powered Malaysia.

APIIT was announced as one of the Top Private Colleges in Malaysia to attain 6-STAR (OUTSTANDING Rating) under the latest Ratings by the Ministry of Higher Education (MOHE) on 18th Dec 2020. MYQUEST is a quality evaluation system assessed by MOHE to evaluate the quality of programmes offered by Malaysian private colleges.

According to the latest Annual Graduate Tracer Study by Ministry of Higher Education Malaysia, 100% of APU graduates were employed by Graduation. This is not just a number, but a significant symbol of our success and pride in nurturing professionals for global careers. To date, over 80,000 alumni have embarked onto their careers worldwide.

sia Pacific University of Technology & Innovation (APU) has been awarded 5-Star Rating for Online Learning in the latest QS Stars Rating System.

The rating – the highest possible rating in the category - demonstrates APU's continued focus in providing interactive, student-centred, and flexible digital learning using innovative technologies that enable its students to learn anytime and anywhere.

APU students are able to continue learning seamlessly through its cloud-based digital platforms that leverages on a variety of tools, media, formats and content to make learning meaningful and stimulating for its students.

In parallel, APU’s Digital Learning Hub (DLH) supports our academic staff by assisting them to create impactful and high-quality digital content to suit various teaching and learning environments, along with inspiring them to use creative teaching and learning techniques.

The QS Rating System is a leading, international ranking system of universities that is awarded by Quacquarelli Symonds (QS) that ranks universities around the world.

APU is a premier private university in Malaysia with an international profile of students that takes pride in offering a wide suite of undergraduate and postgraduate programmes that are authentic, industry-recognised and meet the needs of the labour market.

With an international student community of more than 13,000 students from more than 130 countries studying in its Malaysian campus, APU offers a truly cosmopolitan learning environment which prepares students well for the global challenges which lie ahead. APU offers a wide range of degrees with Technology as a common core. It is APU’s aim to nurture and encourage innovation through our programmes, with the intention of producing individuals who will learn, adapt and think differently in new and better ways.

You work hard to obtain the Degree. We work hard to get you Worldwide Recognition.

The Asia Pacific University has and always will, continue to develop and deliver its academic programmes through unique and well-established international partnerships and Qualifications gained from APU truly meet international quality standards.

Our degrees are widely recognized by international professional bodies as listed below:

APU Engineering Degrees accredited by the Board of Engineers Malaysia, which is a member of the international Washington Accord
APU Actuarial Studies Degrees obtained worldwide recognition from SOA, US and maximum exemptions from IFOA, UK
APU Accounting & Finance Degrees widely recognized by professional Accounting bodies such as ACCA, CPA, ICAEW
        


ISO & SIRIM Certified

APU’s achievements bear testimony to our commitment to excellence in higher education and training, as well as innovative research and development and commercialization. APU is certified to the internationally recognised ISO9001:2008 standards by SIRIM QAS International.

MSC Status Institution

The Scope of the certification covers core and support procedures and processes in the provision of programmes and services for undergraduate and postgraduate levels. Besides, being awarded the MSC Malaysia status for Institutions of Higher Learning is a recognition and testimony of APU’s contribution to Malaysia’s Digital Economy through IT professionals with industry relevant and immediately employable skills upon graduation.

Through our network of APIIT Education Group branch campuses established in Sri Lanka and India, APU also reaches out to young aspiring professionals in these countries, providing them with a unique opportunity of experiencing international best practices in higher education using curricula, processes, resources and systems which have been developed in Malaysia. APU’s academic programmes are approved by the Ministry of Education of Malaysia and the qualifications are accredited, or provisionally accredited by the Malaysian Qualifications Agency (MQA).

Prof. Dr. Abtar Darshan Singh, our Professor of Innovative Digital Learning & Director of the Digital Learning Hub, has been appointed to the prestigious position of the UNESCO Chair on Harnessing Innovations in Technology to Support Teachers & Quality Learning.
 
As the UNESCO Chair, Prof. Dr. Abtar will drive research, training and knowledge sharing initiatives on harnessing innovations in technology to support teachers and quality in teaching and learning in Malaysia as well as developing economies in Asia and around the world.  This also includes equipping teachers and professionals in education with state-of-the-art knowledge and tools to enhance hybrid learning, which has become increasingly important in the post-pandemic learning context.

Asia Pacific University (APU) is a member of The Association of Commonwealth Universities (ACU). One of the world's first international university network, the ACU has more than 500 member institutions in over 50 countries. https://www.acu.ac.uk/.

AACSB - The Association to Advance Collegiate Schools of Business

Asia Pacific University (APU) is among few institutions in Malaysia who are Members of AACSB. AACSB International is a global association of leaders in education and business dedicated to supporting and advancing quality business education worldwide.



Through membership, accreditation, research, thought leadership, professional development, and advocacy, AACSB partners with over 1,500 organizations, from more than 90 countries globally. https://www.aacsb.edu/about

International Association of Innovation Professionals (IAOIP)



APU is the first university in the South East Asia region and second in Asia or Asia Pacific to attain full professional membership of the International Association of Innovation Professionals (IAOIP) since February 2022. The memberships allows for professional certification access via the InnovAcademy for the staff and student. Additionally APU students will be exposed to the RAIKES innovation science competency model and the Mitre Innovation Science toolkit. These platforms will enable engagement and networking with 3,000 likeminded professionals, be part of a community of innovators and also view the annual Innova-Can event or any Live Webinar sessions conducted by global thought leaders, best-selling authors and practitioners. The primary focus is also for APU student to be able to work on UN SDG projects as Final Year Projects or Dissertation or Capstone Projects under mentorship by IAOIP professionals from across the international network of members. From a research angle APU is given full access to the International Journal of Innovation Science (IJIS) publication. APU Leadership is also now part of the ISO 279 working group developing core standards within the innovation space.

"The International Association of Innovation Professionals (IAOIP) is pleased to welcome APU as their latest University Sponsor. We eagerly look forward to working with the faculty and students in continuing to fulfill APU's mission of future-proofing and transforming its students into highly-competent professionals through a unique fusion of Innovation Science technology and creativity. During the next three years, we will be working closely with APU to design and deliver high-impact innovation science learning experiences to help nurture students and professionals for global careers."

- Frank Voehl, IAOIP VP of Certifications.
Double Your Advantage – APU-DMU Dual Degree Programme

Apart from the internationally acclaimed APU Degree, students who are under our Undergraduate & coursework-based Postgraduate programmes have an option to double their advantage by opting in for the APU-DMU Dual Degree Award. APU's partnership with De Montfort University (DMU), UK  enables students to be awarded Dual Awards - separate degree certificates from each institution – and enhances not just teaching and learning experiences, but also career prospects.

Upon graduation, students will receive 2 Degree Certificates & Transcripts: 1 from APU, Malaysia and 1 from DMU, UK.

APU’s Iconic Campus – A Metropolitan Campus Designed for Interactivity

APU’s iconic campus is strategically located at Technology Park Malaysia, Bukit Jalil, Kuala Lumpur. TPM is the ideal location for this new and contemporary Campus due to its strong positioning as Malaysia's primary hub for leading-edge and high-tech developments in a wide variety of areas such as Information and Communication Technology, Biotechnology, Microelectronics, Engineering and Broadcasting. TPM is also located in one of the most rapidly developing areas in Kuala Lumpur, and is well served and accessible through major highways, LRT and other forms of public transportation.

The state-of-the-art APU campus houses world-class facilities that meet industry standards.

Asia Pacific University of Technology & Innovation (APU)’s Ultra-Modern University Campus is strategically located in Technology Park Malaysia (TPM), Kuala Lumpur. APU’s Campus blends technology, integration, innovation and creativity under one roof. Designed by award-winning consultants and architects, APU’s new iconic campus provides not just a university learning environment, but also a lively community spot for our students to formulate new ideas, gain intellectual growth and discover new adventures.

TPM is the ideal location for this new and contemporary Campus due to its strong positioning as Malaysia's primary hub for leading-edge and high-tech developments in a wide variety of areas such as Information and Communication Technology, Biotechnology, Microelectronics, Engineering and Broadcasting. TPM is also located in one of the most rapidly developing areas in Kuala Lumpur, and is well served and accessible through major highways, LRT and other forms of public transportation.

Dynamic Environment Where Aspiring Young Minds Assemble

Being a university student can be one’s most exciting expeditions, where dreams are realized, and the future is envisioned.

The expedition starts at The Spine - a distinctive and unique feature that stretches from the main entrance all the way to the far end of the campus. While providing seamless connectivity to the teaching centres, the courtyards, central atrium and living spaces. This also provides shade and protection from the heat and rain as students and staff move from between the various facilities within the campus. The Spine aims to establish a community aspect for the university – where integration is the key. Covered walkways that extend from the Spine further promote connectivity and cultivates exchange of ideas among students from different disciplines and academics, through the series of ‘intelligent’ teaching, learning, research, and social spaces spanning from the Spine.

Within the Spine, a vibrant array of academic, leisure and social activities take place daily; it is not only the heart of the campus but also the nurturing ground for world-changing global ideas. APU’s Centre Point, which located at the center of the Spine serves as a melting pot of cultures from all over the world, where cultural activities are organized regularly at the campus, fostering long-lasting intercultural relationships among APU students, who come from over 120 countries.

The central atrium space forms the central learning and social hub of the campus with large communal spaces, multipurpose hall and various other facilities like the main library, technology & engineering labs, study lounges and cooperative learning discussion rooms. Students will also get enjoy a lifestyle experience through the sports and recreation facilities such as fitness center, basketball court as well as basement car parks on campus, among many other exciting facilities.

Teaching and learning facilities at APU’s Campus are redesigned to suit the needs of the industry, in line with the Industrial Revolution 4.0, a strong emphasis on cooperative learning is reflected at APU’s new iconic campus, through the abundance of communal spaces and discussion areas, where aspiring young minds come together to formulate innovative ideas.

At APU, we aspire to ensure success in our students’ future careers, granting them ability to combat the global challenges that lie ahead. The campus is a unique fusion of technology, innovation and creativity, to reflect our identity as Malaysia’s leading technological university. The APU’s New Iconic Campus is a campus made ready for the world, to nurture professional graduates who are career-ready upon graduation. To date, the global campus houses 13,000 students who came from 130 countries.

APU was awarded the Premier Digital Tech Institute status by the Malaysia Digital Economy Corporation (MDEC). APU is recognised for its commitment in offering top-notch digital technology courses and ensuring our highly-skilled graduates continue to flourish and fill future digital job demands locally and globally. This status was awarded by the Minister of Higher Education Malaysia in 2017. In June 2019, this status has been renewed for a further 3 years by MDEC.

Under the Premier Digital Tech Institute status, we will be part of MDEC's Premier Digital Tech Ecosystem, in which we will have opportunities to collaborate with key industry players such as IBM and Fusionex to deliver curricula that are up to the industry's expectations, in order to address the needs of technology graduates. MDEC has named 8 strategic industry partners, namely Amazon web Services, CISCO, Intel, JobStreet, Microsoft, Oracle Academy, RunCloud and SAS. These industry partners are set to provide cloud credits, training modules, certification programmes, training, mentoring and employment tools. It is notable that we are already working closely with these global market-leading organisations, and we look forward to further enhancing our collaborative efforts with these companies. In addition, as a graduate from a Premier Digital Tech Institute, our students will now be accessible to wide range of resources, internship and job opportunities with top technological firms in Malaysia.

Since 2017, some significant developments under the APU-MDEC partnership include the launch of the CyberSecurity Talent Zone, the completion of the PGI Cyber Security training and certification, Big Data week and numerous industry-centric workshop and events held at APU. We have also established the APU Digital Career Centre that offers a comprehensive range of services on career development, programmes and experiential learning, internship opportunities and employment assistance.

Premier Digital Tech Universities and Polytechnics, known as Premier Digital Tech Institutions (PDTIs), are Malaysia’s leading digital tech-focused tertiary institutions. The PDTIs have a proven track record in producing high quality graduates for digital tech-based high value jobs, via cutting-edge research and education policies, strong industry linkages, and career development and placement services.

Borne out of a collaboration between MDEC, the Ministry of Education Malaysia and industry leaders, the PDTIs deliver end-to-end solutions to ensure that future graduates are propelled into becoming dynamic members of an innovation-driven and knowledge-powered Malaysia.

Click HERE to read more about MDEC's Premier Digital Tech Universities Initiative.